---
title: Travel Chaos
tags:
  - travel
  - 100DTO
author: kochie
jumbotron:
  src: patrick-campanale-oCsQLKENz34-unsplash.jpg
  alt: Patrick Campanale
blurb:
  I've logged a lot of miles this year and I've observed the insanity that is
  modern air travel. Here's a few highlights of my travels from the past few
  months.
publishedDate: 2022-10-12T12:00:00+11:00
---

As part of my day job I have the privilage of travelling around Australia to
support and empower our customers. Normally most of my clients are in Melbourne,
or prefer that I work remote, but there are still some instances where I need to
travel. Now I'm actually not a nervous flyer, or an anxious traveller, so a lot
of the situations I find myself in are due to my own lack of planning, so this
is my warning that if you get third party anxiety from reading about other
people's travel mishaps, you might want to skip this post.

<Carousel
  maxWidth={300}
  images={[
    {
      src: '/articles-source/04-travel-chaos/IMG_1929.PNG',
      alt: 'Patrick Campanale',
    },
    {
      src: '/articles-source/04-travel-chaos/IMG_1930.PNG',
      alt: 'Patrick Campanale',
    },
    {
      src: '/articles-source/04-travel-chaos/IMG_1931.PNG',
      alt: 'Patrick Campanale',
    },
    {
      src: '/articles-source/04-travel-chaos/IMG_1932.PNG',
      alt: 'Patrick Campanale',
    },
  ]}
/>

## 72 Hours in Malaysia

## Sydney to Melbourne Hooning

I'm convinced the pilots who make the run between Melbourne and Sydney are
trying to race each other for the fastest time. The Melbourne to Sydney route
was the third busiest in 2019 and continues to be one of the busiest in the
world even after the pandemic. Every time I've flown this route the flight
begins with the pilots almost taking off from the taxi-way because they're going
so fast. Once in the air it's afterburners all the way to Sydney. There's barely
enough time to have the snack. This is all great by the way, in fact it
generally takes me longer to get to the airport in Melbourne than the time I
spend in the air. Once we land the pilots must have their bonuses connected to
how much time they taxi at Sydney aiport because most flights seldom use their
brakes to land and just glide to the gate.

## There are two terminals in Kuala Lumpur

## Last passenger on the plane

## What do you mean my ticket hasn't gone through?

This is probably the closest I've come to panicking in the airport. I arrived at
the Qantas terminal in Perth unable to check in. Now this has happened to me
before and it's normally due to some weird issues with Qantas but this time was
different. See I had booked the flight the night before and had closed my laptop
before the confirmation had gone through

## Starcraft 2 on a Netbook

One of my most fondest memories was getting a bootleg copy of the starcraft 2
demo back in 2010 while I was travelling in the states. It was a magical time,
back when a core 2 duo was a supercomputer. I was travelling with an Acer Aspire
One which I had been trying to use as a gaming laptop for the better part of a
month. On the flight back to Australia I was able to get the demo running on
that thing at something like 2 fps. The most glorious 2 fps I've ever seen.
