---
title: >
  Disrupting the Banks
blurb: >
  How did a startup from Melbourne become one of Australia's biggest banks?
tags:
  - technology
  - business
  - 100DTO
author: kochie
jumbotron:
  src: up-banners.jpg
  alt: Up Banner
# publishedDate: 2022-10-20T18:00:00+11:00
publishedDate: 2022-10-19T12:00:00+13:00
---

There's a chart I've been facinated with ever since I was shown it. It presents
the disruption that Uber created in the driving industry when it first entered
the New York City market. Having near exponential growth for the first few years
Uber quickly overtook the taxi industry in New York City. It's a stark reminder
to stagant industries that disruption can come when you least expect it.

![NYC Monthly Taxi Pickups - via [Todd W Schneider](https://toddwschneider.com)](/taxi-1.jpg?width=600&height=600&intrinsic=true)

## Banks Used to Suck

The Australian banking industry pre 2008 was in a similar situation. Due in part
to the
[Mining Boom](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-08-30/fact-check-mining-boom-and-the-global-financial-crisis/8849784)
Australia was one of the only countries in the west not suffer a recession
in 2008. With interest rates at a long term and _stable_ low there was very
little incentive for Australians to move banks or refinance their homes.

Additionaly the lack of competition made the products provided by banks almost
identical. A savings account with almost no interest, a transaction account with
a monthly fee, credit cards that have huge fees and interest rates. This only
grew resentment, but most customers didn't have any better alternative - as can
be seen on the below chart until 2013 refinancing stayed quite low.

(In fact the government tried to encourage people to switch so they would spend
more money in the economy rather than just paying it.) Citation?

![Refinancing of Australian residential homes - [ABS](https://www.abs.gov.au/media-centre/media-releases/refinancing-reached-all-time-high-july)](/abs_refinancing.svg?width=990&height=550)

But in the last few years as home prices incresed and real wage growth stagnated
disapproval of the banks grew. This reached boiling point when the government
announced a [Royal Commission](https://www.royalcommission.gov.au/banking) into
banking practices in Australia. A commission that resulted in minimal change to
the Australian banking system.

At around the same time a number of smaller "neobanks" started to begin
operations in Australia, these banks were met with mixed success but lot of
fan-fare as disgruntled customers were keen for a better deal.

Around the year 2015 the bulk of millenials started to reach the age where they
had significant savings and full time employment. With that this mobile first
generation started to look for a better way to manage their money.

Some readers might not know what a "neobank" is, if you're farmiliar with the
traditional system of banking you'd expect a bank to have physical branches
where you can go to deposit and withdraw your money. A neobank is different, for
starters they have no physical branches and operate entirely online, because of
this the types of services they provide are also quite different to a regular
bank. Generally only providing basic transaction and savings accounts.

But neobanks have offered another product to consumers - (a word for good
customer support/moral incentives).

I've noticed in my work that trust, and good intentions can make the difference
between a business succeding or becoming a failure. Customers, expecially
younger generations are more willing to switch to a new service if it aligns
with their morals and values more accuratly. This means that companies can no
longer assume that their customers will stay with them just because they've been
around for a long time.

This isn't an entirely new phenomenon, different industries have had reckonings
when their customers have revolted, but banking is different. For one thing,
banking has been a very conservative industry, taking a long time to adapt new
technology and stratergies. This is one of the reasons I believe that customers
are
[changing banks in record numbers](https://www.fool.com.au/2020/09/01/this-chart-shows-why-big-banks-are-in-trouble/).
Banks and other businesses now have to take into account their investments in
fossil fuels, tobacco, military technologies, and social movements when
considering
[market forces](https://www.marketforces.org.au/info/compare-bank-table/) that
will affect customer decision making.

This goes beyond branding as any reasonably good marketing company can help a
company appear to have these qualities.

## The Rise of Neobanks

Up is a great case study about the success a buisness can have when it focuses
on customer outcomes and not what the industry it's based in is doing.

![Up Logo](/UP-MEDIA-LOGO-LIGHT.svg?width=700&height=350&intrinsic=true)

When Up first came onto the scene in 2018 it already had a substancial following
of people who had used the product in it's beta stage. Because of how different
and feature rich the product was the bank quickly became one of the largest in
Australia with over 400,000 customers[^1] at the time of writing.

### A Better Culture

The interesting thing is that given enough time neobanks provide almost the same
products (even more) than larger banks do.

In Austrlia the "big 4" major banks have roughly X% of the Australian banking
market, that's down from Y% in 2018. It's not enough for companies to do what
their competitors are doing and simply catch up, doing so will only stop the
loss of customers and will not be able to bring old users back.

I asked some Up customers what they like about the plaform compared to their old
banks and got a mix of different opinions.

<Quote
  author="Matthew Timms"
  position="Software Engineer and Up customer"
  src="https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1394587315465383936/joA7a1bB_400x400.jpg"
  twitter="https://twitter.com/_matthew_timms"
>
  <div>
    The Australian banking landscape, prior to the wave of neobanks, was an
    impersonal hellscape. Banks served businesses & home loaners; there was no
    rush to make the individual banking experience any better.
  </div>
  <div>
    Up, as a startup, needed to focus on user growth & they did so through
    developing an intuitive & enjoyable user experience which felt like a breath
    of fresh air. They scooped up millennials who felt neglected by big banks -
    they didn't own businesses nor mortgages. But they will in a decade.
  </div>
  <div>
    So as the wave of neobanks comes to an end, as we see many of them close
    their doors, Up stands by far the most successful Aus neobank & a facinating
    story of industry disruption. Pfhfhf I could start a podcast about it but it
    wouldn't be very interesting.
  </div>
</Quote>

The story of Up's success if not a new one. There will be other companies that
disrupt industries and innovate ultimately delivering better outcomes for
consumers. The reason Up is so interesting is because it's a case study of how
customer loyalty can be earned when a company empraces their customers.

There are several examples of how Up's treatment of customers has different
sometimes wildly from what other banks are doing. Case-and-point very recently
the Osko instant payment system between banks went down resulting in all
transfers in Austrlia going back to the 3-day wait time. While most banks only
had a simple announcement stateing there was a LSE, Up send hourly updates to
its customers keeping them informed - some banks didn't event notify cutomers of
the outage!

![Outage notifications from Up]()

Earning trust with consumers is an incredibly hard endeavour, a piece of advice
one of my managers gave me not to long ago when dealing with this is to
"over-communicate" - that's exactly what Up does with it's customers and is what
I see as the second reason that it's done such a good job at disrupting the hold
the "big 4" banks have on Australia.

### Features

The final reason is that Up is an objectivly better product. When entering a
market segment as a new-comer there are only one way that you can take customers
from your competition - provide more value. You can generally do that in two
ways, either make a product that has more features at the same price, or to make
a product significantly cheaper. [Athena Home Loans]() is a great example of the
latter, as a home loan provider there aren't many features that customers really
want besides the ability to own a home, so you have to cut the price of your
product which is exatly what Athena does.

Up is particullarly interesting because it's able to perform a juggle of both
these strategies. As a beta tester myself I remember being astonished at the
number of features the app came with compared to my previous bank, what was even
more bizzare was that the interest rate was _better_ than my old bank and had no
fees.

The added bonus of releasing new features means that people are more engaged
with the brand. Wanting to have the latest and greatest is a powerful insentive
to convince consumers to use your product. I asked a few people about what
features they care about in a banking app and a point that Emma Scully made sums
up nicely how Up has managed to attract a large group of followers.

<Quote
  author="Emma Scully"
  position="Research Engineer and Up customer"
  src="https://pbs.twimg.com/profile_images/1314013908357713920/ynens_r4_400x400.jpg"
  twitter="https://twitter.com/emma_scully98"
>
  Up has reframed my online banking into more of a organisational and
  productivity oriented experience rather than just an app where one can view
  their balance and transfer money. You don't typically hang out for a new
  update or follow the Instagram page of your usual banking apps, but Up brings
  exciting new features that actually gets you following your bank's social
  media to keep up.
</Quote>

Up also ties in its strategies of over-communication and new features together
with a public roadmap - [Tree of Up](https://up.com.au/tree). Instilling a sence
of excitement and anticipation about a product keeps customers highly engaged.
This is the exact opposite of how most companies treat their featuer releases -
secret and sporadic. Up flips that paradigm by showing what they're working on
and the timeline that they're expecting to release it. This approach gives
customers a feeling of trust that there will be future value on the plaform
because they can see that more features and products are on the way.

![Tree of Up](/tree_of_up.svg?width=5059.85&height=3018.41)

There are a lot of lessons that can be learnt from Ups impressive rise to the
top, the most important for businesses is to listen to what your customers want
and build around that framework - stop looking at what your competitors are
doing just focus on building a great customer expereience[^2].

Don't stop innovating. Like with the case of Uber when an industry stops
innovating it will enventually be disrupted by a new business model or company
that can shake up the market. If Ups success indicates anything it's that if the
banking industry can be distrupted, any industry can be.

[^1]: On the website
[^2]:
    This is actually something that Amazon prides itself on as well, by not
    looking at what competitors have done and listening to customers some of AWS
    most sussessful services like RedShift and Aurora have been released.
